# Auditory System Paper

|         |                            |
| ------- | -------------------------- |
| Created | @November 13, 2023 3:31 PM |
| Tags    |                            |

## Abstract

**Background**

No consensus regarding **precise sub-divisions and topography** of areas
forming human auditory cortex.

**Goal -** Propose topography of human auditory cortex based on
**anatomical** and **functional properties** as revealed by **cyto-**
and **myelo-architecture** and **fMRI** at 7 Tesla

**Method -** Review old and recent studies of auditory cortex to analyze
tonotopic maps at **single subject** and **group level** using multiple
maps of frequency preference, tuning width, myelination and speech/voice
selectivity.

**Result -** Suggest accurate model of human auditory areas that is
consistent with existing characterizations and can serve as reference
for future studies.

### key terms

**cytoarchitecture** is the cellular composition of nervous tissue under
microscope

**myeloarchitecture**refers to the pattern of myelination over the
cerebral cortex

**tonotopic map** spatial arrangement of where sounds of different
frequencies processed in brain

**subject/group level maps** are tonotopic are maps which show average
sound-evoked activation levels of subject or group.

-----

### key terms

**parcellations** the process of accurately dividing the brain into
different regions

**MR scanner**magnetic resonance scanners introduce acoustic noise****

### Introduction

**Existing approach to divisions**

Divide cortex into smaller anatomical areas based on micro-structural
properties.

Functional properties of each area examined through **analysis of
neuron** and **neuronal population responses**

**Challenges in human research**

In animal models direct study of link between micro-structural
properties and functional properties feasible in same individual.

In humans we use **non-invasive** research which relies on making
connections between observed brain activity patterns and broader
anatomical features visible in brain scans. Which is **less precise**
than for animal studies.

**Importance of accurate parcellations**

Divisions are important in studying **functional roles** of areas,
**comparing experimental results,** understanding **similarities** and
**differences** between human and animal cortex.

**Monkey Model vs Human Auditory cortex**

Monkey auditory cortex

  - well established hierarchical organization with core, belt and
    parabelt region

<!-- end list -->

  - big macro-anatomical differences making direct application
    challenging

Human auditory cortex

  - Expanded surface areas and greater inter-individual variability

**Inconsistencies in Area Definitions**

Post-mortem analysis indicate core, belt and parabelt organization in
human auditory cortex similar to monkey.

⇒ Large differences in finer level of area definition, both in number
and location of presumed auditory areas.

**Challenges in tonotopy-based parcellations**

Tonotopy (frequency preference) in auditory system runs in parallel
throughout core and adjacent belt areas

⇒ Tonotopy by itself does not mark precise delineations of areal borders
which leads to lack of consensus of tonotopy-based parcellations

**Consistency in tonotopic maps**

Tonotopic maps do show consistency in highlighting primary frequency
gradient

Single-subject analysis crucial for detailing variable topography across
subjects

-----

## Anatomy of human auditory cortex

### Macro-anatomy of human auditory cortex

**Location**

Its located in **supratemporal plane,** comprising **superior (upper)**
two-thirds of **superior temporal gyrus (STG)**

**Divisions**

On macroscopic scale it can be divided into

<table>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Planum polare (PP)</td>
<td>Heschl’s gyrus (HG)</td>
<td>Planum temporale (PT)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td>- Branches from STG and hidden in depth of <strong>sylvian fissure (SF)</strong><br />
- Evolution new and not present in Macaque<br />
- Bordered by insular cortex in the middle, STG on the sides, first traverse sulcus and - Herschl’s sulcus in the front and back<br />
</td>
<td>- Behind HG<br />
- Significantly expanded in humans compared to monkey<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

-----

### Cytoarchitectonic (cellular) characterization of human auditory cortex

**Major landmarks**

Cytoarchitectonic characterization has major landmarks/regions outlined
and named by various sources over the years.

**General observations**

**Red - Side view** STG is indicated in the side view of the left
hemisphere

**Blue -** Planum polare

**Yellow** - Heschl’s Gyrus

**Green** - Planum temporale

The diagram is basically all the different names given to I think the
primary auditory cortex by various scientists

![](Auditory%20System%20Paper%2030cbef4fae2a42198397ac1f51ade69a/Untitled.png)

**Sulci (groove identification)**

Major sulci outlined in black which includes

  - FTS

<!-- end list -->

  - Sulcus intermediate (SI)

<!-- end list -->

  - Heschl’s sulcus
      - variations in number of Heschl’s sulci (HS1, HS2)

![](Auditory%20System%20Paper%2030cbef4fae2a42198397ac1f51ade69a/Untitled%201.png)

-----

### Cytoarchitectonic subdivisions of human auditory cortex

**Architectonic schema**

Human auditory cortex has been labelled based on various structural
schemas, leading to differences in observed auditory areas, their
locations, and nomenclature across studies.

**Homologs (similarities) to monkey primate auditory cortex (PAC)**

Human core may be divided into subfields analogous to monkey AI, R, and
possibly RT

Various studies refer to core area as BA41, AL, or Te1, see the goofy
aah diagram in the top for reference.

**Viability in Human PAC location**

Human positioning of PAC relative to sulcal and gyral landmarks is
vairable, in brains with one Heschl’s gyrus PAC is confined to this
heschl’s gyrus. While in brains with multiple HGs, PAC may extend
postero-medially

### layers in cerebral cortex

![](Auditory%20System%20Paper%2030cbef4fae2a42198397ac1f51ade69a/Untitled%202.png)

**Belt region in human auditory cortex**

Similar to monkey human cortex has less granular fields surrounding
primary auditory cortex, which forms the belt region.

Cell packing in belt fields less dense than core, larger more numerous
pyramidal cells in layer 3

HS regions and parabelt regions have reduced granular structure compared
to primary core areas.

**Medial Belt and Posteromedial HG**

Medial belt is anteriomedial to PAC at the border between insular and
temporal cortex, characterized by **thin cortical ribbon** and
**prominant infragranular layers**

**Challenges in comparative studies**

Comparative studies between monkey and human aud are complicated by
recent expanses in human cortex and lack of **thorough functional
property establishment** in either species.

Progress in understanding homologies and differences is expected from
functional fMRI measurements in monkey brain.

-----

### **Myeloarchitectonic Parcellations of the Supratemporal Plane**

Myelin content variations offer potential means of dividing up the
supratemporal plane.

Myeloarchtectonic studies in macaque auditory cortex revealed that
auditory core can be distinguished by heavy myelination, reflecting
dense thalamocortical connections

**Human Temporal lobe parcellations**

There are existing myeloarchitectonic parcellations from two Hopf and
Beck of the temporal lobe which resulted in 6/7 regions

Both approaches divided regions into sub-regions then into further
areas, leading to significant number of regions overall.

**Densely myelinatd region on HG (ttr/ttr1)**

Densely myelinated region on HG likely is and identifier for human PAC

Myelin density was highest on crown of HG, decreasing along the side.
Caudal part of HG was astriate, while rostral part exhibited unistriate
pattern

![](Auditory%20System%20Paper%2030cbef4fae2a42198397ac1f51ade69a/Untitled%203.png)

**Decreasing myelination with distance from HG**

Myelination consistently decreases as we move further from HG which
likely reflects the parabelt and belt region around the PAC

Infront of HG to planum temporale a bi-striate mylenination has been
reported, which likely corresponds to human lateral belt (region ttr2 in
Hopf and ttrll in Beck)

**Correspondence with Cytoarchitectonic schemas**

Simultaneous application of looking at both the myelination and the
cellular composition of the nervous system provides greater precision in
boundary defintion.

-----

## Tonotopic Maps in Auditory cortex

### **Tonotopy in non-human primate**

**Tonotopy -** spatial representation of neurons preferred sound
frequency in auditory cortex

Larger spatial tonotopic maps consistently found across species

In primate tonotopic maps present in core, with frequency gradient
reversal indicating borders between separate auditory fields (Al, R, RT)

**Tonotopic Maps in Core and Belt Areas**

Core region has clear reversal in frequency gradient

Belt areas also have tonotopic maps which run parallel to those in core
region.

**Tuning width as distinguishing factor**

Neurons in core areas have narrow tuning width which represents a sharp
frequency selectivity

Whereas neurons in the belt regions have a broader tuning width, thus
the tuning width can be used to distinguish between the regions but the
tonotopic gradient cannot.

-----

### Tonotopic maps in human auditory cortex

**Tonotopic maps**

fMRI studies have confirmed functional organization of monkey auditory
system to some extent.

Recent ultra-high field MR studies depicted detailed tonotopic layout,
interpreting them as reflecting human homology of monkey areas A1 and R

**Tonotopic maps in superior Temporal plane**

Advanced in fMRI enabled extraction of tonotopic maps through human
superior temporal plane

Consistent maps show large low-freqencey region in HG surrounded by high
frequency regions

V shaped pattern created by regions preferring high frequencies.

**Variability in interpreting Tonotopic maps**

Human auditory core situated within high-low-high frequency gradient but
studies vary in assigning this gradient to core

Interpretations range from

  - Placing core along Heschl’s gyrus

<!-- end list -->

  - Placing core region across HG

<!-- end list -->

  - Some suggest perpendicular / oblique arrangmeent

<!-- end list -->

  - Complete high-low-high mape going from PP → PT interpreted with some
    considering it as reflecting primary auditory fields and other
    suggesting involvement of auditory belt fields.

**Additional frequency regions**

Additional low frequency region reported to the front-side border of
main gradient on PP/infront of STS

**Interpretations of tonotopic maps**

Various interpretations include classical and orthogonal placements of
core regions A1 and R

-----

### Additional frequency gradients in fine-grained tonotopic maps

**Fine grained tonotopic maps**

Higher spatial resolution and examination of single subejct maps reveal
more frequency reversals in auditory cortex than commonly assumed

Small additional frequency gradients present on supratemporal plane,
often not evident on group maps ⇒ need for careful interpretation

**Patterns in additional frequency gradients**

Four consistent patterns observed

Provides information for defining a functional topography of human
auditory areas

**Divisions in low and high frequency regions**

High frequency

  - Divided into two smaller regions by small low-frequnecy region,
    possibly reflecting fields of human medial belt cortex

Low frequency

  - Divided into two smaller regions with one likely belonging to
    auditory core and the other to the lateral belt

**Frequency reversals on posteromedial HG**

Reversal frequency observed on posteromedial end of HG, potentially
corresponding to monkey regions CM/CL

**Additional frequency regions posterior to main gradient**

Additional frequency regions location posteriorly including
low-frequency region and clusters preferring high frequencies

These regions could also reflect lateral belt and parabelt cortex or
regions like CM/CL, precise topology requires knowledge of response
properties

-----

### Different recording methods to determine frequency selective auditory cortical responses

**Magneto-Encephalographic (MEG) Studies**

Reproducible gradients within an individual but highly variably **across
individuals** adding complexity to tonotopic mapping

**Limitations of MEG for Tonotopic Mapping**

There are issues with modelling simultaneously active locations which
makes it challenging to distinguish tonotopic gradients within close
temporal and spatial proximity

There is a controversial interpretation of the N100m component commonly
used in MEG tonotopy studies

**Invasive Electrophysiological recordings**

Invasive recordings offer good spatial and temporal resolution

ECoG studies reveal dynamic mirror-symmetric tonotopic gradients on
postero-lateral STG indicating extension of cortical tonotopy beyond
auditory core

Limited applicability and spatial coverage of invasive recordings, often
restricted to patiants undergoing neurosurgical procedures

**Conclusion**

MEG can capture auditory processing dynamics but is not optimal for
mapping small frequency gradients within human coritcal tonotopic maps

Invasive electrophysiological recordings provide valuable insights but
have limitations of applicability to spatial coverage hindering
comprehensive understanding of spectral selectivity across supratemporal
plane

-----

## Characterization of auditory cortex beyond tonotopy

### limitations of tonotopic maps

**Parallel assumption from monkey results**

Assumption that frequency gradient in human auditory cortex runs
parallel to that in the belt region is based monkey results.

**Inability to divide auditory cortex**

Tonotopic maps alone cannot effectively divide auditory cortex into
core, belt and parabelt alone which leads to some gaps in understanding.

**Challenges in determining core orientation and size**

Tonotopicmaps cannot determine orientation of core with respect to HG.
Additionally maps cannot accurately determine size of human core

**Core size**

Variability - The measured core size varies significantly across
individuals. This variability gives rise to challenges in the
interpretation of tonotopic maps.

Overestimation - Some studies interpret HG and surrounding areas on PP
and PT as all being core which leads to an overestimation in the size

**Macro/Microanatomy and Tonotopic variability**

Variations in anatomy types and tonotopic patterns across individuals,
tonotopic maps alone cannot account for interindividual variations.

**Challenges with duplications of HG**

In cases of duplications of HG the main low frequency patch in tonotopic
map likely to move in back direction, which further complicates
interpretations

**Importance of reliable estimates**

Reliable estimates of core size and location are crucial for
systematically studying functional properties of auditory fields,
understanding sound representations and addressing deviations in special
cases (e.g. musicians, tinnitius, cochlear impant patients)

-----

### in-vivo mapping of myelo-architecture

**myelin-density mapping**

One approach to parcellating the auditory cortex is to the non-invasive
mapping of cortical myelin density using MRI

**non-invasive myelin mapping techniques**

its now possible to map myelin density in-vivo tissue as opposed to
post-morten tissue

**distribution of myelin in auditory cortex**

In-vivo mapping shown heavily myelinated region on superior temporal
plane.

Anterior regions (PP) exhibit the least myelination while posterior
regions (PT) are moderately myelinated

HG is identified as the most myelinated region

**Correlation with tonotopic gradients**

Highly myelinated region on HG corresponds with region Te1.1 and Te1.0
and mirror-symmetric tonotopic gradients along HG interpreted as hA1 and
hR

**Variability in myelin-related contrast**

Myelin-related contrast can vary among hemispheres and individuals

Variability underscores importance of obtaining distinct measures beyond
tonotopy for identifying auditory core in individual hemispheres

**additional measures**

Studies emphasize necessity of incorporating measures beyond tonotopy,
such as myelin-related contrasts to accurately identify core in
individual hemispheres due to interindividual variability

-----

### cortical tuning beyond frequency

**cortical tuning width to distinguish core from belt**

Cortical tuning width represents frequency selectivity of neurons and is
used to distinguish core from belt areas in monkey auditory cortex

**computational model for tuning width maps**

Recent studies used computational models to analyze fMRI responses to
natural sounds

They generated maps of tuning width throughout auditory cortex

Maps show regions of both narrow and broader tuning along supratemporal
plane

**identification of PAC and tonotopic gradient**

Narrow tuned region along HG is identified in both hemispheres showing
high-low-hight-low tonotopic gradient along HG reflecting hA1, hR, and
hRT

**limitations of tuning width maps**

Tuning width maps reflect width of main spectral peak

Provide information on **frequency selectivity**

Do not provide information on **complexity of spectral tuning**

May also reflect homogeneity of neuronal spectral tuning rather than
tuning width alone

**periodicity preference maps**

periodicity refers to the rate of temporal modulations in sound that
evokes a pitch percept

periodicity preference has been suggested as crucial for describing
topography of auditory cortex

**clover leaf parcellation**

This refers to parcellations or divisions which are based on a
combination of maps of frequency so tonotopy and periodicity preference

Tonotopic maps segregate clusters

Periodotopic reversals divide cluster into auditory fields

**Speech / voice regions**

Research indicates existence of regions in non-PAC that respond strongly
to conspecific vocalizations (speech/voice) regions

**overlap with tonotopic maps**

Speech/voice regions overlap with low-frequency part of tonotopic maps

⇒ specialized filter mechanism enhancing low-frequency features crucial
for speech and voice sounds

**tonotopic mapping for high-order auditory areas**

Tonotopic mapping can also help for high-order auditory areas

-----

## Working model of human auditory cortex

### orientation and size of human core

**ongoing discussion on interpretation of tonotopic maps**

Interpretation of tonotopic maps still debated

efforts to reconcile various findings from

  - high-resolution tonotopic mapping

<!-- end list -->

  - non-invasive functional characterizations

<!-- end list -->

  - anatomical studies

**working model of auditory cortex**

working model divides auditory cortex into

1.  core

<!-- end list -->

2.  medial and lateral belt

<!-- end list -->

3.  parabelt

**core size and orientation based on cytoarchitectonics**

Core size corresponds to about half of HG, largely restricted to HG but
may deviate at postero-medial end

**orientation of core**

Core oriented at small angle from long direction of STG

medial part of core coincides with region of highest myelination, this
orientation is consistent with macaque model

**tonotopic gradients in hA1 and hR**

main high → low frequency gradient reflects hA1 and proceeds laterally

second high frequency maximum fond on anterior and lateral HG creating
second frequency map reflecting hR

**comparion with macaque model**

Proposed model very similar to non-human primate model with PAC rotated
to align with HG while maintaining identical tonotopic organization

**frequency gradient reversal in hRT**

frequency gradient reversal occurs in atero-lateral HG reflecting hRT
which results in the high → low → high → low tonotopic pattern within
human PAC

-----

### exploring belt and para-belt region

**Auditory responsive region surrounding core**

Auditory responsive region that surrounds the core which possible
represents the medial and lateral belt

medial belt - small low-frequency region which divides high-frequency
region into hMM and hRM

**medial belt regions and frequency reversal**

in medial belt there is frequency reversal at medial junction

interpreted as reflecting regions hCM and hCL , these regions contain
fully tonotopic gradients but with strong predominance of response to
high frequencies

**lateral belt and tonotopic gradient**

Lateral belt contains single high → low tonotopic gradient

May comprise two functionally sparate subdivisions with medial part
corresponding to lateral belt region in monkey

**hAL region in lateral belt**

lateral part of lateral belt strongly tuned to low frequencies and
overlaps with speech/voice sensitive regions on the lateral HG / middle
STG

Region my correspond to human homolog of pitch region and is tuned to
low frequency spetral energy important for processing voices and speech

**human parabelt region**

size may vary between hemisphere

Larger in left hemisphere and its border with lateral belt cannot be
reliably identified non-invasively

**MRI exploration and myelin contrast**

Progress identifying borders between lateral belt and parabelt may be
expected from MRI explorations of myelin contrast

Myelin related contrast can provide insights into divisons between belt
and parabelt

**Functional properties of parabelt regions**

Exploration of further properties like

  - tonotopy

<!-- end list -->

  - tuning width

<!-- end list -->

  - response properties to temporal/spectral modulation

in parabelt region may provide insight into topology in auditory
parabelt and sound representations

-----

### hemispheric differences in topography of human auditory cortex

**tonotopic organization of hemispheric biases**

Some studies showed that L or R hemisphere had more prominent tonotopic
organization

In other studies main tonotopic axis near HG similar across hemispheres
and orientation of narrowly tuned region with respect to HG is stable
across hemispheres

**Consistency in additional frequency regions**

Additional frequency regions reported above HG on STG in frontal
temporal stripe (FTS) and on back middle end of HG are consistently
observed in both L and R hemispheres

**Increased inter-subject variability in right hemisphere**

As the title says between different subjects there is an increased
variability, so, difference in the tonotopic maps in the right
hemisphere compared to the maps in the left

This might be due to differences in macro-anatomy with regions

**Macro-anatomical asymmetries**

There are asymmetries in the macro-anatomy between hemispheres, these
asymmetries are present in infants which suggests there is some genetic
determination in what causes them

**Functional roles and asymmetries**

Left and right hemisphere have different functional roles in sound
processing, left hemisphere is relatively dominant for language
processing while right hemisphere is superior in fine spectral
processing

Hemispheric biases in acoustic feature processing reflect
**task-dependent specialization** of the hemispheres

**Future research**

Relation of functional asymmetry underlying tonotopic maps has not been
studies extensively

Future research needed to explore how reported hemispheric biases in
spectrotemporal processing are reflected within different auditory
fields and tonotopic organization
